---
layout: post
title: LaTex To Word Conversion
date: 2025-07-01 11:00:00-0600
description: convert LaTex file into Word with formatting
tags:
  - LaTex
categories:
  - tech
---

# Latex to Word conversion

I have been using Latex for writting and has very limitted knowledge on using word. However, there is time when the literature have to be in the Word format, and it is extremely inconveninent especially for scientific writing. To avoid learning how to write in Word, I start to search how to convert Latex into Word. 

[Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/index.html) so far has been a very useful tool fulliing that purpose. To start, first need to install it. The installtion is well documented in Pandoc home page. For MAC user as myself, it can be installed using Homebrew using simply comand

```bash
brew install pandoc
```

A simple conversion can be done with the command

```bash
panddoc your_tex_file_name.tex -o your_docx_file_name.docx
```

A simple conversion like this may not be satisfactoy, especially if you need to give this to your supervisor. Few problems still need to be adress

1. Formatting of the converted file (font size, font style etc)
2. Proper citations
3. Numbering and correct referencing of figures, equations tabels etc. 

## Conversion file formatting

The command above convert the tex file to docx in defalt format. To specify the format of the docx, you can create a docx in which you have customized your format and use it as a reference during pandoc conversion

Frist create a reference docx file for you to customize format, using the command

```bash
pandoc -o custom_reference_file.docx --print-default-data-file reference.docx
```

This should create a word file named `custom_reference_file.docx` with content as follows

**Here should be a demo figure**

Then you can change the format in this docx file accordingly (change the style of the docx), and use it as the template for pandas conversion

```bash
pandoc your_tex_file_name.tex --reference-doc=custom_reference_file.docx -o your_docx_file_name.docx
```

The converted file know should has the same style as you set up in the reference docx. 

## Citations

You can provide the Biblatex file you used for LaTex to pandoc for bibliography using `--bibliography`. You should provide the relative path of your `.bib` file just as you would do in latex. An example would  be

```bash
pandoc your_tex_file_name.tex --bibliography=your_references.bib -o your_docx_file_name.docx
```

However, the citation in the coverted docx file might not shown up correctly. This is usually resolved using pandoc-citeproc by specifying command

```bash
pandoc your_tex_file_name.tex --citeproc --bibliography=your_reference.bib -o your_docx_file_name.docx
```

If you have specific citation style preference, you can also specify that in pandoc through citation-style-language file `.csl`. Usually this will be provided by the publisher of the specific journal you are targeting. You can also find the file from theis Github repo [https://github.com/citation-style-language/styles](https://github.com/citation-style-language/styles). After you have the `.csl` file, specify that in the pandoc command

```bash
pandoc your_tex_file_name.tex --citeproc --bibliography=your_reference.bib --csl=your_csl.csl -o your docx_file_name.docx
```

## Cross reference

Pandoc do a pretty good job converting the LaTex equations to word question with no requirement of equition editors like MathType, which is a major reason why I chose convert LaTex to Word in pandoc instead of just writting in docx. 

* Noticed that some math commands in LaTex, especially some provided by packages like amsmath are not supported in pandoc conversion. Pandoc will still make the conervsion by simply phrase unknown commands in its original form (for example, `\text` in `align` enivronment is not recognized by pandoc, so whenever `\text{}` appears in LaTex, the pandoc will simply convert that into '\text{what you wrote}' in the docx file )
* This problem could be reolvsed by making a pandoc filter so that the unrecognized commands is detecated and converted to someting in replace. 

However, in LaTex, the equations, labels, tabels or sections can be numbered. While native pandoc dosen't support this feature of numbering. Also, in LaTex, referencing these object is easily done by creating `\label{}` for the one that you wish to refer and use `\ref{label_name}` at where you wish to refer in you article. They will be ference as the correponsidng number.

**Example figures**

However, this is not supported natively in pandoc, which is quit problematic espeically for scintific writting. The feature can be achived through pandoc filters. There are many online resoruces providing filters for different features, and I have found pandoc-crossref and pandoc-tex-numbering quit useful for cross-referencing in my situation.

**pandoc-crossref**: this extension is one popular cross referencing extension for pandoc. It enables lot of different features and customization options. However, it does not officially support LaTex. Some has shown that it still work on LaTex with restrictions, but in my case it doesn't works well. I haven't find a way to fixed the issue.

* works for simply eqution numbering though

**pandoc-tex-numbering**: this filter does not support as many features as pandoc and is also not as well documented as pandoc-crossref, but it did a pretty decent job numbering and cross-referenceing the object in LaTex to Word. 

* It also support multiline equations and subfigures, quit handy

### Equations

For equation numbering, you can use pandoc-crossref specifying 

* `autoEqnLabels`: automatically number all display equations
* `tableEqns`: word doesn't natively support equation numbering. If this is not specified as `true`, the number will be add directly into the equation block. If `true`,  a table will created so that number can be put at the end of line. 

To do this, specify

```bash
pandoc your_tex_file_name.tex --filter pandoc-crossref -M autoEqnLabels -o your_docx_file_name.docx
```

this will generate numbering for the equations. Or

```bash
pandoc your_tex_file_name.tex --filter pandoc-crossref -M autoEqnLabels -M tableEqns -o your_docx_file_name.docx
```

and the number will be put at the end of line. 

The reference of the equations is not right though.

Pandoc-tex-numbering handle this equit will. You can use it as the filter for pandoc

```bash
pandoc your_tex_file_name.tex --filter pandoc-tex-numbering -o your_docx_file_name.docx
```

The defult setting will numbering each of your sections in levels, and numbering the number and figures accordingly (like 1.1.2 for equation 2 in section 1.1). I don't want section numbering, and leveled numbering  I can specify that by passing the metadata as

```bash
pandoc your_tex_file_name.tex --filter pandoc-tex-numbering -M number-sections=false -M number-reset-level=0 -o your_docx_file_name.docx
```

More metadata command can be found in their Github repo. The number though is in the math block and it didn't seems to be a way to put it at the end of the line. 

### Figures and Tabels

In LaTex, the numbering of figures or tables will be shown as 'Figure #: you caption' in the caption region of the figure. Pandoc-tex-numbering can also do this during the conversing. You can customize the prefix using `figure-prefix`. The default value is "Figure"

```
pandoc your_tex_file_name.tex --filter pandoc_tex_numbering -M figure-prefix="Fig" -o your_docx_file_name.docx
```

This will specify the prefix of figure as "Fig #: your caption".



## Summary

Now, the generated Word file will have pre-specified format, correct citations, corss-reference and numbering for equastions and figures. It will match the standard to give to your PI perhaps with few minor adjustments. 



## Ref

* https://tex.stackexchange.com/questions/369424/pandoc-latex-to-docx-change-font-size
* https://github.com/fncokg/pandoc-tex-numbering
* https://ja01.chem.buffalo.edu/etcetera/latex-pandoc-word.html
* https://const-ae.name/post/2024-08-02-latex-to-word-conversion-with-pandoc/
* https://medium.com/@zhelinchen91/how-to-convert-from-latex-to-ms-word-with-pandoc-f2045a762293